# MiniTidal Audio Workshop 1-3 - Ancient Mathemeticians, Filters and Pitches (~1h)

Ref:
 - https://estuary.mcmaster.ca
 - http://tidalcycles.org/docs/
 - https://tidalcycles.org/docs/patternlib/howtos/playchords/
 - https://userbase.tidalcycles.org/All_the_functions (caveat)

## Setup Cells!

```
!presetview twocolumns
```

Choose MiniTidal from the language dropdown for both cells

## Euclidean Patterns ... great for music?

Euclidean patterns use a specific formula to divide a cycle into pieces, then fit a number of sample events between the pieces as evenly as possible.

For example, we can divide a cycle into `8` pieces, then fit `4` sample events evenly between the pieces
```
sound "bd(4,8)"
```

That is, `4` sample events (in this case, `bd`) fitted into a sequence length of `8` which has a pattern that looks like
```
|x.x.x.x.|x.x.x.x.|
```
**yawn** right?

Euclidean patterns get rhythmically interesting when you use numbers that don't fit evenly into the sequence. This example fits `5` `bd` events into an `8` slot sequence
```
sound "bd(5,8)"
```
Which has a pattern that looks like
```
|x.xx.xx.|x.xx.xx.
```
Of course we can pattern them with mininotation
```
sound "bd(<3 5>,<8 8 16>)"
```

Ancient Mathemeticians **rock**!

## Effective Effects!

Effects are filters that you can apply to your sound to change specific properties. They are applied after your code, using a `#` prefix

`gain` affects the loudness of the sound, from 0 (silent) to 1 (default sample volume) - you can go higher, use with caution!

```
sound "ukulele*2"
# gain "1 0.7"
```

`pan` controls which side of the stereo channel the sound goes to - `0` is hard left, `0.5` is the middle, `1` is hard right

```
sound "bd sd cb"
# pan "0 0.5 1"
```

`vowel` shapes the sound according to the vowel you choose...

```
sound "sd*20"
# vowel "a e i o u"
```

`hcutoff` and `cutoff` are high and low pass filters respectively, accepting parameters from `0` to `20000` (Hz)

```
sound "moog"
# hcutoff "<6000 4000 2000 1000 500 300>" -- only play frequencies above num
```
```
sound "moog"
# cutoff "<200 500 1000 2000 5000>" -- only play frequencies below num
```

`delay`, `delaytime`, and `delayfeedback` are all related parameters to a general `delay` effect

 - `delay`: wet/dry gain up to 1.0
 - `delaytime`: space between delay events, in units of cycles
 - `delayfeedback`: how much gain applies to each subsequent delay event (usually less than 1)

```
sound "jazz:5*2"
# delay 1
# delaytime "<0.125 0.25>"
# delayfeedback 0.7
```

 *Note: be careful with feedback numbers greater than 1!*

## Control your samples length... please!

By now, you will have noticed that not all samples are equal - some have a long playback (`moog`), some are short (`bd, sd`), and everything in between.

There are several tools we can make use of to control how long the samples play for - the simplest is

`cut` stops one sample playing when the next sample starts playing. Try the following example with and without the `cut`
```
note "0 4 7 10" #  s "moog"
-- # cut 1
```

`begin` and `end` control where in the sample playback should begin from, and end at. `begin` should always take a lower value than `end` (otherwise... ?)
```
note "0 4 7 10" #  s "moog"
# begin 0.02
# end 0.04
```

  *Note: certain samples may introduce little pops with this method

## More speed (or less)!

There are a number of ways that speed can affect our sounds - let's break down some common speed adjustments

`!setcps` in the terminal chat - this controls the global estuary tempo, in cycles per second. By default this is set to `0.5 cps` (which is equivalent to `120bpm` for a 4/4 time signature), and due to it being an estuary setting, not a minitidal setting, is not patternable

Try playing a pattern and increasing the cps to `0.75` or `1.0` 
```
!setcps 0.75
```

`speed` is an effect that changes the playback speed of samples (and therefore the pitch) - standard playback speed is `1.0`, try mixing it up

```
sound "sd*4"
# speed "1.0 1.5 0.5 -1"
```
...what is `# speed "-1"` doing?

## `note` notation for more accurate pitch control

`note` can be used in the same way as `n` notation (and people often mix them up!), but rather than affecting which sample is used from the sample folder, `note` affects the **pitch** of the sample.

Let's introduce a new set of samples, `ukulele` by Thomas Grund - these are a set of ukulele notes tuned to concert C (ie *all the same note*) but played with different techniques, note length, vibrato etc. To prove this, let's start with our previous `n` pattern and see how it sounds

```
n "0 3 [4 5] [8 7]" # sound "ukulele"
```

Some different octaves, but all tuned to C - Let's change to `note`

```
note "0 3 [4 5] [8 7]" # sound "ukulele"
```

*Note: the sample should be tuned to C to give predictable results with `note`*

The numbers used correspond to the 12 tones of the [Chromatic Scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chromatic_scale) used in Western Music 

However, `note` can also be directed to work with various [scales](https://tidalcycles.org/docs/patternlib/tour/harmony_melody/#scalelist) based on the 12 tone system

```
note (scale "major" "<[0 1 2 3] [4 5 6 7]>") # sound "ukulele"
```

In this case, each number corresponds to a degree of the **major** scale (counting from 0)

You can play multiple notes at a time using [chords](https://tidalcycles.org/docs/patternlib/howtos/playchords/)

```
note "[c'maj d'min e'min g'maj]" # sound "ukulele"
```

You can pattern chords

```
note "<[c'maj ~ d'min] e'min [~ g'maj]>" # sound "ukulele"
```

`arp` is a function for use with `note` to **arpeggiate** a chord - ie play the notes of a chord one after the other with a short gap between

```
note (arp "down" "<[c4'maj'8 ~ d4'min'ii] e4'min'6 [~ g'maj]>") # sound "ukulele"
```

There are a [variety of ways to arpeggiate chords](https://tidalcycles.org/docs/reference/harmony_melody/#arp), try some more!

`arp` divides the cycle by the number of notes in the chord which is why you hear some chords play a faster or slower series of notes.

---

# Exercises:

1. There are many more [chord qualities](https://tidalcycles.org/docs/patternlib/howtos/playchords/) available to use - explore!

2. Try writing a short 2 or 4 cycle melody using `note` and a sample(s) of your choice

3. `fast` and `slow` can actually be used interchangeably - find a way to slow down your melody sequence using `fast`, and vice versa with `slow`

4. Recreate our `hurry` pattern using the `fast` and `speed` functions instead

5. Investigate using multiple samples at a time with a **euclidean** pattern, what happens?
```
sound "[bd sd](3,8)"
```

## For Bonus Points

6. Write a chord progression to accompany your melody from 2.

7. Write a 4 cycle melody to accompany our chord progression from the `note` section
```
note "<[c4'maj'8 ~ d4'min'ii] e4'min'6 [~ g'maj]>" # sound "ukulele"
```

---
